README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">Todo PR Checker</h1>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/marketplace/todo-pr-checker">
    <img src="./development/images/icon/images/icon.png" width="150" alt="Todo PR Checker">
  </a>
  </br>
  <i>Get the app on the <a href="https://github.com/marketplace/todo-pr-checker">GitHub Marketplace</a></i>
</p>

Do you keep forgetting to resolve that one `// TODO:...` or fix the last ` # Bug...` before merging your Pull Requests?

The Todo PR Checker will make sure that doesn't happen anymore.
The app checks all code changes in your open Pull Requests for remaining `Todo`, `Fixme` etc. action items in code comments and leaves a comment on the PR with embedded code links to any items that were found.

This list will update whenever new changes are pushed, so you always know exactly how much work is left.

The app supports a wide array of programming languages and action items.
Should you find that your language of choice or action item is not supported out-of-the-box, you can easily configure the app to support it.

To minimize falsely identified comments (e.g. the characters that start a comment are contained in a string), the app will only detect action items if the comment starts in its own line.
The following examples would *not* cause the app to flag the action items:

```javascript
let variable = true; // TODO: Find a better name for the variable

let otherVar = false; /*
If the comment does not start on its own line, the TODO action item will not be detected!
*/
```

These action items would however be flagged correctly:

```javascript
// TODO: If a line comment stands on its own, action items will be flagged.
/*
Multiline block comments are supported, no matter how many lines they span,
the TODO will be detected
*/
```

## Options

This app supports the `.github/config.yml` file to configure options.
You can use this file to support additional programming languages, action items, and more.

To configure options, add a `todo-pr-checker` key at the top-level of your `.github/config.yml` file:

```yaml
todo-pr-checker:
  post_comment: 'items_found'
  (...)
```

To get started, you can copy the `.github/config.yml` file from this repository and adjust it to your needs.

### Available options

| Option | Possible Values | Description | Default |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `post_comment` | `items_found`, `always`, `never` | Controls when the app should post a comment. By default, a comment is only posted if an action item has been found. If set to `never`, the check will still fail. If set to `always`, the app will post a comment that all action items have been resolved if none are found. | `items_found` |
| `enable_multiline_comments` | `true`, `false` | Whether or not looking for action items in multiline block comments is enabled or not. You may want to turn this option off if you find that the app incorrectly marks action items in your Pull Request. This behaviour may appear if at least one of the opening or closing line of the block comment (e.g. `*/` and `/*` in JavaScript) are not included in the Pull Request diff, which causes them to not be found by the app. For multiline comments to always work, you must ensure that both the opening and closing characters are included in the diff. If a language does not have line comments, this option does not affect the behaviour if an action item is located in the same line as the opening characters of a block comment, in which case that line is treated as a line comment. | `true` |
| `action_items` | `string[]` | A list of action items to look for in code comments. If you set this option, the default values will be overwritten, so you must include them in your list to use them. | `['TODO', 'FIXME', 'BUG']` |
| `case_sensitive` | `true`, `false` | Controls whether the app should look for action items in a case-sensitive manner. | `false` |
| `add_languages` | `[string[file_type, line_comment, block_start, block_end]]`</br>Example: `[['js', '//', '/*', '*,'], ['css', null, '/*', '*/'], ['.py', '#']]` | A list of a list of programming languages to add support for. This list will be added to the already supported languages. If you define a language that is already supported, the default values will be overwritten. `file_type` must be the extension of the file (e.g. `js`) and may start with a `.`. You may omit the block comment definitions if the file type does not support block comments. If you want to omit the definition of a `line_comment`, you must set `line_comment` to `null`. If defining `block_comment_start`, `block_comment_end` must also be defined. *The file types shown in the example are already natively supported by the app.* | `null` |

<details>
<summary>Expand me to see the currently supported file types:</summary>
<ul>
  <li><code>.astro</code></li>
  <li><code>.bash</code></li>
  <li><code>.c</code>, <code>.cpp</code>, <code>.cs</code>, <code>.css</code></li>
  <li><code>.dart</code></li>
  <li><code>.gitignore</code>, <code>.go</code>, <code>.groovy</code></li>
  <li><code>.haskell</code>, <code>.html</code></li>
  <li><code>.java</code>, <code>.js</code></li>
  <li><code>.kotlin</code></li>
  <li><code>.less</code>, <code>.lua</code></li>
  <li><code>.m</code>, <code>.md</code></li>
  <li><code>.perl</code>, <code>.php</code>, <code>.ps1</code>, <code>.py</code></li>
  <li><code>.r</code>, <code>.rb</code>, <code>.rust</code></li>
  <li><code>.sass</code>, <code>.scala</code>, <code>.scss</code>, <code>.sh</code>, <code>.shell</code>, <code>.sql</code>, <code>.swift</code></li>
  <li><code>.tex</code>, <code>.ts</code></li>
  <li><code>.yaml</code>, <code>.yml</code></li>
  <li><code>.xml</code></li>
</ul>
</details>

## Development

Before you are able to locally develop and run the app, you need to create and set up a GitHub App as described in the [GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/creating-github-apps), so you are able to receive webhooks from GitHub in your local instance of the app.

Install the required gems with:

```bash
bundle install
```

Then create a `.env` file with the following content:

```text
GITHUB_APP_ID=${App ID from the GitHub App settings}
GITHUB_PRIVATE_KEY=${Private key generated in the GitHub App settings}
GITHUB_WEBHOOK_SECRET=${Webhook secret set in the GitHub App settings}
APP_FRIENDLY_NAME=${Name of the CI check}
```

The documentation linked above describes where to obtain these values.

You can then use [smee](https://smee.io/) to forward the webhook events sent by GitHub to your local app, like this:

```bash
smee --url https://smee.io/gsPiE7FUxg0q3TPz --path / --port 3000
```

Make sure to also set the Webhook URL in the app settings on GitHub to the same smee URL, like `https://smee.io/gsPiE7FUxg0q3TPz` in the example.

Then, you can start the app with:

```bash
ruby ./app.rb
```

If you have correctly created and installed the app in a repository, and set up the webhooks correctly, you should now see the app receiving events like these when you create or update a Pull Request:

```text
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.359807 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_suite
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.360041 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action requested
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.786714 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event pull_request
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.786849 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action synchronize
xxx.xx.xxx.xxx:35146 - - [05/Feb/2024:14:04:29 +0000] "POST / HTTP/1.1" 200 - 0.2616
xxx.xx.xxx.xxx:47458 - - [05/Feb/2024:14:04:29 +0000] "POST / HTTP/1.1" 200 - 0.8099
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:29.872895 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_run
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:29.873041 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action created
xxx.xx.xxx.xxx:36950 - - [05/Feb/2024:14:04:32 +0000] "POST / HTTP/1.1" 200 - 2.7705
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.227254 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_suite
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.227460 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action completed
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.351184 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_run
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.351388 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action completed
```

### Troubleshooting

If your private key is being rejected/fails to parse, replace the line breaks of the key in your `.env` file with `\n`.

---

This app is developed using Ruby with Sinatra, automatically built and deployed using Google Cloud Build, and subsequently hosted through Google Cloud Run whenever a new version is released on GitHub.

If you enjoy the app and want to say thanks, consider buying me a [coffee](https://ko-fi.com/nikkelm) or [sponsoring](https://github.com/sponsors/NikkelM) this project.

Commit message:

Updated block comment behaviour to also alert if action item is on starting line

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">Todo PR Checker</h1>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/marketplace/todo-pr-checker">
    <img src="./development/images/icon/images/icon.png" width="150" alt="Todo PR Checker">
  </a>
  </br>
  <i>Get the app on the <a href="https://github.com/marketplace/todo-pr-checker">GitHub Marketplace</a></i>
</p>

Do you keep forgetting to resolve that one `// TODO:...` or fix the last ` # Bug...` before merging your Pull Requests?

The Todo PR Checker will make sure that doesn't happen anymore.
The app checks all code changes in your open Pull Requests for remaining `Todo`, `Fixme` etc. action items in code comments and leaves a comment on the PR with embedded code links to any items that were found.

This list will update whenever new changes are pushed, so you always know exactly how much work is left.

The app supports a wide array of programming languages and action items.
Should you find that your language of choice or action item is not supported out-of-the-box, you can easily configure the app to support it.

To minimize falsely identified comments (e.g. the characters that start a comment are contained in a string), the app will only detect action items if the comment starts in its own line.
The following examples would *not* cause the app to flag the action items:

```javascript
let variable = true; // TODO: Find a better name for the variable

let otherVar = false; /*
If the comment does not start on its own line, the TODO action item will not be detected!
*/
```

These action items would however be flagged correctly:

```javascript
// TODO: If a line comment stands on its own, action items will be flagged.
/*
Multiline block comments are supported, no matter how many lines they span,
the TODO will be detected
*/
```

## Options

This app supports the `.github/config.yml` file to configure options.
You can use this file to support additional programming languages, action items, and more.

To configure options, add a `todo-pr-checker` key at the top-level of your `.github/config.yml` file:

```yaml
todo-pr-checker:
  post_comment: 'items_found'
  (...)
```

To get started, you can copy the `.github/config.yml` file from this repository and adjust it to your needs.

### Available options

| Option | Possible Values | Description | Default |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `post_comment` | `items_found`, `always`, `never` | Controls when the app should post a comment. By default, a comment is only posted if an action item has been found. If set to `never`, the check will still fail. If set to `always`, the app will post a comment that all action items have been resolved if none are found. | `items_found` |
| `enable_multiline_comments` | `true`, `false` | Whether or not looking for action items in multiline block comments is enabled or not. When enabled, the app *may* incorrectly mark action items in your Pull Request if at least one of the opening or closing line of the block comment (e.g. `*/` and `/*` in JavaScript) are not included in the Pull Request diff, which causes them to not be found by the app. For multiline comments to always work, you must ensure that both the opening and closing characters are included in the diff. Action items located on the first line of a block comment will always be detected, even if this option is disabled. | `false` |
| `action_items` | `string[]` | A list of action items to look for in code comments. If you set this option, the default values will be overwritten, so you must include them in your list to use them. | `['TODO', 'FIXME', 'BUG']` |
| `case_sensitive` | `true`, `false` | Controls whether the app should look for action items in a case-sensitive manner. | `false` |
| `add_languages` | `[string[file_type, line_comment, block_start, block_end]]`</br>Example: `[['js', '//', '/*', '*,'], ['css', null, '/*', '*/'], ['.py', '#']]` | A list of a list of programming languages to add support for. This list will be added to the already supported languages. If you define a language that is already supported, the default values will be overwritten. `file_type` must be the extension of the file (e.g. `js`) and may start with a `.`. You may omit the block comment definitions if the file type does not support block comments. If you want to omit the definition of a `line_comment`, you must set `line_comment` to `null`. If defining `block_comment_start`, `block_comment_end` must also be defined. *The file types shown in the example are already natively supported by the app.* | `null` |

<details>
<summary>Expand me to see the currently supported file types:</summary>
<ul>
  <li><code>.astro</code></li>
  <li><code>.bash</code></li>
  <li><code>.c</code>, <code>.cpp</code>, <code>.cs</code>, <code>.css</code></li>
  <li><code>.dart</code></li>
  <li><code>.gitignore</code>, <code>.go</code>, <code>.groovy</code></li>
  <li><code>.haskell</code>, <code>.html</code></li>
  <li><code>.java</code>, <code>.js</code></li>
  <li><code>.kotlin</code></li>
  <li><code>.less</code>, <code>.lua</code></li>
  <li><code>.m</code>, <code>.md</code></li>
  <li><code>.perl</code>, <code>.php</code>, <code>.ps1</code>, <code>.py</code></li>
  <li><code>.r</code>, <code>.rb</code>, <code>.rust</code></li>
  <li><code>.sass</code>, <code>.scala</code>, <code>.scss</code>, <code>.sh</code>, <code>.shell</code>, <code>.sql</code>, <code>.swift</code></li>
  <li><code>.tex</code>, <code>.ts</code></li>
  <li><code>.yaml</code>, <code>.yml</code></li>
  <li><code>.xml</code></li>
</ul>
</details>

## Development

Before you are able to locally develop and run the app, you need to create and set up a GitHub App as described in the [GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/apps/creating-github-apps), so you are able to receive webhooks from GitHub in your local instance of the app.

Install the required gems with:

```bash
bundle install
```

Then create a `.env` file with the following content:

```text
GITHUB_APP_ID=${App ID from the GitHub App settings}
GITHUB_PRIVATE_KEY=${Private key generated in the GitHub App settings}
GITHUB_WEBHOOK_SECRET=${Webhook secret set in the GitHub App settings}
APP_FRIENDLY_NAME=${Name of the CI check}
```

The documentation linked above describes where to obtain these values.

You can then use [smee](https://smee.io/) to forward the webhook events sent by GitHub to your local app, like this:

```bash
smee --url https://smee.io/gsPiE7FUxg0q3TPz --path / --port 3000
```

Make sure to also set the Webhook URL in the app settings on GitHub to the same smee URL, like `https://smee.io/gsPiE7FUxg0q3TPz` in the example.

Then, you can start the app with:

```bash
ruby ./app.rb
```

If you have correctly created and installed the app in a repository, and set up the webhooks correctly, you should now see the app receiving events like these when you create or update a Pull Request:

```text
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.359807 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_suite
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.360041 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action requested
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.786714 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event pull_request
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:28.786849 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action synchronize
xxx.xx.xxx.xxx:35146 - - [05/Feb/2024:14:04:29 +0000] "POST / HTTP/1.1" 200 - 0.2616
xxx.xx.xxx.xxx:47458 - - [05/Feb/2024:14:04:29 +0000] "POST / HTTP/1.1" 200 - 0.8099
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:29.872895 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_run
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:29.873041 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action created
xxx.xx.xxx.xxx:36950 - - [05/Feb/2024:14:04:32 +0000] "POST / HTTP/1.1" 200 - 2.7705
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.227254 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_suite
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.227460 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action completed
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.351184 #26008] DEBUG -- : ---- received event check_run
D, [2024-02-05T14:04:33.351388 #26008] DEBUG -- : ----    action completed
```

### Troubleshooting

If your private key is being rejected/fails to parse, replace the line breaks of the key in your `.env` file with `\n`.

---

This app is developed using Ruby with Sinatra, automatically built and deployed using Google Cloud Build, and subsequently hosted through Google Cloud Run whenever a new version is released on GitHub.

If you enjoy the app and want to say thanks, consider buying me a [coffee](https://ko-fi.com/nikkelm) or [sponsoring](https://github.com/sponsors/NikkelM) this project.
